# large-language model (LLM)

Recently, I read some papers, and I found one commonality that they treat protein data as text data. The natural language processing (NLP) methods seems highly transferable to the computational biology[cite]. For example, the **Tansformer** model is specially effective for language understanding, such as the language transition. ESM3 smartly used the mechanisms of Transformer in its own model and specially for the protein task.
> A consensus is developing that underlying these sequences is a fundamental language of protein biology that can be understood using language models (6–11)
> 
> Unified rational protein engineering with sequence-based deep representation learning. Nature Methods, 16(12):1–8, 2019. | Modeling aspects of the language of life through transfer-learning protein sequences. BMC bioinformatics, 20(1):723, 2019. | Biological structure and function emerge from scaling unsupervised learning to 250 million protein sequences. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 118(15):e2016239118, April 2021. | Large language models generate functional protein sequences across diverse families. Nature Biotechnology, 41(8):1099–1106, August 2023. | ProtGPT2:is a deep unsupervised language model for protein design. Nat. Commun., 13(1):4348, July 2022. | Language models generalize beyond natural proteins. bioRxiv, pages 2022–12, 2022.

I would like to keep sharing what I am learning.
1. Hayes, Tomas, et al. "Simulating 500 million years of evolution with a language model." bioRxiv (2024): 2024-07.


## Simulating 500 million years of evolution with a language model 
> Here we show that language models trained on tokens generated by evolution can act as evolutionary simulators to generate functional proteins that are far away from known proteins. 

> We present ESM3, a frontier **multimodal generative language model** that reasons over the sequence, structure, and function of proteins.

> . Among the generations that we synthesized, we found a bright fluorescent protein at far distance (58% identity) from known fluorescent proteins. Similarly distant natural fluorescent proteins are separated by over five hundred million years of evolution
